Summary:
Supporting the growth of green infrastructure is critical ground for community resilience to
the steepening creep of climate change. One of the most potent legacies we are cultivating for future
generations is the expansion of our urban tree canopies. This refers to areas covered by trees when
viewed from above, whether public or private.
1 Urban tree canopies help cool city streets, filter
pollutants, protect biodiversity, manage stormwater, and improve public health–on top of strictly
profitable increases in property value.
2
Grievously, an inequitable distribution of these benefits, as well as increased vulnerability to
the effects of climate change, is the logical consequence of historical disinvestment from ghettoized
neighborhoods. This package creates a system of logic which may be useful in building a community
database field-verifying existing municipal data, and promote an equitable distribution of urban
canopy coverage, as outlined in the Boston Urban Forest Plan.
In particular, we wanted to create something that would allow for users to plan, record, and
update the status of trees based on the specific data and strategies available for each of sixteen Boston
neighborhoods.
3 To do so, we implemented a series of class modules linking neighborhoods to parcels
to trees. Parcels store variables helpful to planning tree planting efforts; i.e., category of land use, species
distribution, heat disparity, and priority index. Tree attributes like species, health, and maturation can
be accessed to further assist area-specific decision-making. Printing a Neighborhood, Parcel, or Tree
instance gives a quick summary of its key aspects.
Design:
We have relied heavily on the mode of scoring census block groups forged by American Forests
in their flagship tool, Tree Equity Score, which calculates and synthesizes complex variables like
neighborhood tree canopy goals, existing tree cover, heat extremity, and social vulnerability to generate
geospatial equity scores.
3 City of Boston, “Neighborhood Strategies,” 2022.
2 The Nature Conservancy, “Benefits of Urban Trees,” 2018.
1 City of Boston, “Urban Forest Plan,” 2023.
Tree Equity Score is not open source. However, by using pygris to geocode address input and
standardizing the numeric identifiers that uniquely label those smallest statistical geographic areas for
which the US Census Bureau tabulates data
4
, GEOIDs; we were able to use pandas dataframes to
create an effective system replicating this score assignment by identifying GEOID matches in American
Forest’s published data sets.
The neighborhood class manages municipal data available for specific districts. Tree instances
and their data are able to be stored by species in Parcel instances using a dictionary attribute. In Parcel,
each unique address that is instantiated is stored within a class dictionary by address, which copies its
data over using the __dict__ attribute to avoid error whenever a new instance with the same address is
invoked. As trees can be stored in parcels, and parcels inherit from neighborhoods, this class dictionary
has a myriad of potential applications for storing and accessing data.
Addresses which cannot be properly geocoded are handled with a system of logic that assigns a
“geoerror” attribute to each parcel. If geocoding fails, the user is informed that many aspects of analysis
are unavailable for the specified address; however, it can still be stored.
Trees are instantiated with a default “status” attribute of True, which represents that it has
been planted and is alive. This status can be set to ‘planned’ for planned Trees, or even to False to
represent loss. Attributes assigned to Trees are meant to facilitate not only reporting that a tree exists or
has been planted, but maintaining a record of canopy gains and losses, even allowing for changes in
health and maturation to be recorded.
Usage:
This package has been envisioned as facilitating a unifying space for municipal data to be
verified in the field by a variety of contributors in a database owned by and open to the community. Its
logical flow was designed to assist in efforts to streamline sharing between community actors and
stakeholders involved in local development initiatives which may benefit from neighborhood tree data;
track/visualize canopy gains and losses; and,
above all, to organize equitable resource
distribution.
A simulated “run” of how its methods
and modules may be used is included in a
“main.py” module, which draws from both a
Community class in “community.py” which
organizes a simple, sample database using
sqlite3, and a module which organizes various
user input functions in “user_input.py”
Discussion:
Many geospatial mapping libraries exist, and have likely been used in the extensive variety of
tools which exist for the specific task of mapping tree equity. However, what we have observed is that
these tools were largely designed to convince; they are mostly used to advocate for investing in urban